Malapit, Ma. Hermosa C. 
BSIS-3
CASE STUDY

Scenario: 
As a software manager, I oversee a development team that handles various projects. Recently, another department approached me with a request for a joint effort. They were seeking help from our software engineers to support their team in the Research and Development (R&D) department, as they were facing tight deadlines. The challenge was clear: the R&D department needed assistance to meet their target dates, and we had to step in and assist, despite the fact that there was a significant learning curve involved.

Although the schedule was already very tight, we decided to lend our support to help them meet their goals. Despite the initial challenges, the collaboration showed promising progress. However, as we were nearing the end of the project and approaching the target deadline, one of my developers faced a personal family crisis, which unfortunately disrupted our progress and further jeopardised our ability to meet the deadline.

As a Manager: How would you handle the situation when a key team member faces a personal issue that affects the project timeline? What steps would you take to ensure the team stays on track, and how would you communicate with both the client and your team?
1. As a manager I will make sure that the project does not deviate from the set schedule, I would work with the remaining team to share the developer’s responsibilities, depending on their skillset and time. In some situations, it may be the case that changing the scope of the overall project or focusing on important areas of the project would be required to facilitate a better transition. At the same time, I would update the client on how the other developer missing from the project may affect the completion schedule. Such a situation calls for the need to be transparent as well as honest in order to build trust and manage expectations through the unfortunate change.

As a Developer: If you were the one facing a family emergency, how would you handle the situation to ensure that it doesn't negatively impact the project timeline? What actions would you take to manage your workload, communicate effectively with your manager, and ensure the project stays on course?
2. If I had a family emergency, I would try to be honest with my manager and inform him and/or her about the situation as soon as possible. My manager and I would assess the scope of the emergency, how long I would spend attempting to resolve it, and how it might affect the project. We would also analyze the necessary and most urgent tasks to prioritize the less important ones and the tasks that can be done later or assigned to someone else. This type of communication would assist in clarifying expectations and managing the project more effectively.

What Could Have Been Done Better?: Reflect on how both the manager and the developer could have better anticipated potential risks and mitigated issues before they arose. What strategies might have helped avoid this situation or managed it more effectively?
3. As a preventative measure, the manager should have identified possible risks including personal crises and created backup plans. Regular contact with the team may also have encouraged such communication and made the manager aware of the likely scope of problems. The developer could have shown more initiative in relaying possible personal commitments and prospect obstacles to the manager so that steps could be taken to plan ahead. The absence of an employee would nonetheless have impacted the consequences had the employee made as a minimum a backup plan that included backup personnel and verbalised the activities required. Most importantly however is that the team has a sound culture that encourages relational and individualalism in dealing with the unexpected.